
This project was my master's thesis at Colorado State University (CSU).  The work was part of a joint effort between NASA and the National Park Service to utilize some of NASA's satellite-derived imagery products for applied land management purposes.  I was awarded a NASA-funded research assistantship to attend CSU.  I used a variety of modeling techniques in R Statistical Software and SAS to predict species habitat across three National Parks; techniques included logistic regression, geospatial analysis, and methods which account for spatial auto-correlation.  The work utilized a variety of environmental variable surfaces, including satellite-derived indices of vegetation, fire-related variables, and on-the-ground species observations.  Below is the abstract; see pdf in this folder for full thesis.

Key words:
modeling, regression, spatial analysis, spatial statistics, prediction, inference, invasive species, burn severity, fire, invasibility, habitat suitability

Abstract
This study is motivated by the difficulties land managers face while attempting to simultaneously maintain the natural role of fire in ecosystems and prevent the spread and proliferation of invasive plants. I developed habitat suitability models to predict the responses of three invasive species to fire and other environmental variables: one species in each of three National Parks. For each species, model comparisons tested whether the inclusion of nationally-available data on burn severity, time since fire, and fire occurrence could improve habitat suitability models relative to non-burn data alone.
Each species demonstrated significant responses to fire, although incorporation of fire information into the models improved model performance for some species more than for others. In Yellowstone NP, Linnaria dalmatica was more likely to occur in areas of low burn severity, while in Sequoia & Kings Canyon NP, Cirsium vulgare was more likely to occur in areas of high severity and areas of rapid vegetation recovery. In Chapter 2, I further examined populations of Carduus nutans within Grand Teton NP using detailed vegetation map data and specifying interactions between vegetation class and the burn variables. This technique demonstrated some vegetation types were more susceptible to post-fire invasion than others. Between post-fire years one and twelve, the odds of C. nutans presence decrease within lodgepole and hydrophilic vegetation types, but increase within deciduous forests, sagebrush and other vegetation types. Predictive models which incorporate dynamic ecological processes such as fire offer great potential to guide post- fire invasive plant management. Such models can help determine whether an invasive is significantly influenced by fire, and if so, which burn variables are most relevant. When the species is fire-influenced these models can more efficiently and precisely prioritize areas in need of treatment than either habitat maps that lack burn information or simply prioritizing using burn severity maps.

